======================================
Let pip Build the Distribution for You
======================================

Our wheel script is dandy, but once you need to add more features, it becomes
difficult to manage and update. Therefore, Python packaging provides a standard
framework, `PEP 517`_, to develop tools that build wheels, so different
projects can share those tools and avoid dealing with the details.

.. _`PEP 517`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0517/

There are several `PEP 517`_ backend implementations available. The most
famous is Setuptools, but other tools like Flit and Poetry are also gaining
traction. You should use them when developing your own project. But let's roll
our own here, because why not!

.. note::

    If you're wondering: pip is a `PEP 517`_ frontend. So once we have a
    backend, we can use pip to call it to generate a wheel.

A `PEP 517`_ backend must implement two Python functions:

* ``build_wheel``
* ``build_sdist``


Build a wheel
=============

The ``build_wheel`` hook can be implemented to, well, build wheels.

.. literalinclude:: /../example-project/packager/pep517.py
    :caption: packager/pep517.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 2-39

Next, we need to tell pip where our backend is. This is done with `PEP 518`_,
which introduces the configuration file ``pyproject.toml``, and a TOML table
for this:

.. _`PEP 518`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0518/

.. literalinclude:: /../example-project/pyproject.toml
    :caption: pyproject.toml
    :language: toml

* ``requires`` lists packages the frontend should install *before* running the
  backend. We leave it blank since we include the script in the project, and
  only use the standard library.
* ``backend-path`` tells the frontend where to find the backend. Empty means
  where the ``pyproject.toml`` file is.
* ``build-backend`` tells the frontend how to import the backend functions.

Now we can let pip build the wheel for us::

    $ pip wheel --no-deps /path/to/example-project
    Processing /path/to/example-project
      Getting requirements to build wheel ... done
        Preparing wheel metadata ... done
    Building wheels for collected packages: my-package
      Building wheel for my-package (PEP 517) ... done
      Created wheel for my-package: filename=my_package-2-py3-none-any.whl ...
      Stored in directory: ...
    Successfully built my-package

Or we can let pip build and install the wheel in one shot::

    $ pip install /path/to/example-project
    Processing /path/to/example-project
      Getting requirements to build wheel ... done
        Preparing wheel metadata ... done
    Building wheels for collected packages: my-package
      Building wheel for my-package (PEP 517) ... done
      Created wheel for my-package: filename=my_package-2-py3-none-any.whl ...
      Stored in directory: ...
    Successfully built my-package
    Installing collected packages: my-package
      Attempting uninstall: my-package
        Found existing installation: my-package 1
        Uninstalling my-package-1:
          Successfully uninstalled my-package-1
    Successfully installed my-package-2


Build a source distribution
===========================

A source distribution, a.k.a. *sdist*, is an archive to destribute the source
code with some simple descriptive metadata. It is most commonly used by
packages that require binary compilation to support unknown platforms, and is
also useful for auditing purposes.

When pip receives an sdist, it first extract the source code, and builds a
wheel from it to install. [#sdist-wheel]_ The relation can be drawn like this:

.. code-block:: none

              extract
      +-----------------------+
      |                       v
    +-------+  build_sdist  +--------------+
    | sdist | <------------ | source code  |
    +-------+               +--------------+
                              |
                              | build_wheel
                              v
                            +--------------+
                            |    wheel     |
                            +--------------+
                              |
                              | install
                              v
                            +--------------+
                            | installation |
                            +--------------+

.. [#sdist-wheel] There are historical fallbacks to this, but let's avoid
    the details here. The sdist-wheel relation is true in modern contexts.

Since sdists need to be built to make sense anyway, their content is much less
rigid than wheels'. The only constraint is basically to always use a gzipped
POSIX.1-2001 pax tar with UTF-8 paths.

.. literalinclude:: /../example-project/packager/pep517.py
    :caption: packager/pep517.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 1,49-

Not much we haven't seen here. This is very similar to how we built wheels,
with only slight differences:

* We use `tarfile` instead of `zipfile` to create a gzipped pax tar.
* We need to bundle both ``pyproject.toml`` and the ``packager`` directory
  along, so the sdist can build itself later.

pip does not know how to buld an sdist because it's a package installer, and
the installation process never needs to call ``build_sdist``, as shown in the
above graph. But we use the ``build`` frontend instead::

    $ py -m pip install build
    $ py -m build /path/to/example-project --sdist --output /path/to/save/wheel

.. note::

    The ``build`` tool is still in early development and experiemental. Feel
    free to report problems to `FFY00/python-build`_.

.. _`FFY00/python-build`: https://github.com/FFY00/python-build
